In the thirteenth century, French scientists discovered that when a needle was placed on the surface of a spherical natural magnet, the needle oriented itself along different directions for different locations on the magnet. It was determined that the [[magnetic force]] formed magnetic-field lines that encircled the sphere and passed through two points on the sphere diametrically opposed to one another. These poles became known as the *north and south poles* of the magnet. North and south poles were found to exist for every magnet, regardless of shape. It was also discovered that like poles repel one another and opposite poles attract one another. This attraction-repulsion property is similar to the [[electric charge]], but there is one important difference: *electric charges can be isolated, but magnetic poles always exist in pairs*. No matter how small a permanent magnet gets, it retains a north and south pole.

The magnetic lines surrounding a magnet represent the [[magnetic flux density]] $\mathbf{B}$. A [[magnetic field]] not only exists around permanent magnets but can also be created by electric current. This connection between electricity and magnetism was discovered in 1819 by the Danish scientist Hans Oersted (1777-1851), who found that electric current in a wire caused a compass needle to deflect, and the the needle turned so that its direction was always perpendicular to the wire and to the radial line connecting the wire to the needle. The net result of his findings was his deduction that a current-carrying wire induces a magnetic field that forms closed circular loops around the wire. Shortly after Oersted's discovery, French scientists Jean Baptiste Biot and Felix Savart developed an expression that relates the magnetic flux density $\mathbf{B}$ at a point in space to the current $I$ in the conductor, known today as the [[Biot-Savart law]].